 Update added 18/06/2024

There have been some updates and clarifications since the thread started. I will try to slowly add them here.

First off @taniwha has released a newer version of the .mu plugin. Found through this link.

https://github.com/taniwha/io_object_mu

You click on the green "Code" button and then download the Zip file in drop down.

(for those who understand coding and would like to see how the plugin is being upgraded over time, use this link the logs. )

This version requires a Blender or BforArtist version greater than 3 to work.

As the BforArtist version is much easier for someone starting out to get a handle on I will put the link for version 3.1.3 here. Remember it is Blender , just with an easier to use interface. Leaving this link for now as it is the one I currently use. @Stone Blue and others have used the latest plugin on all BforArtist versions up to the latest and it is working, so lastest release link below this one.

https://github.com/Bforartists/Bforartists/releases/tag/v3.1.3

 

BforArtists latest release page.

You can find a link on this page for older versions too.

https://www.bforartists.de/download/

It is best to download the Zip version, create a folder on the main hard drive (not in "Program Files" on a windows computer as it will mess up it's needed permissions) and then extract into the folder you have created. Once you have it in go through the folder structure so that you are in bforartists3_313\3.2\scripts\addons_contrib\ and then extract the .mu plugin into it.

This will put the folder  "io_object_mu-master" into there.

Now start BforArtists and under the "Edit" drop down tab, at the bottom you will see "Preferences", click on it and when it's window comes up, go half way down it and click on Add-ons, then at the top middle click "Testing" once it is clicked scroll down the list till you see "Import-Export MU models KSP" and click the check box. Once it has a tick in it, make sure you go in to it using the expansion triangle that is next to the tick box, then go down and click on the following, "Install KSP Shader Presets", "Install KSP Config Templates" and "Create Community Color Palettes".

Once you have done this go to the bottom left of the window and click on the small blue box with 3 parallel lines in it and then click on "Save Preferences" This way what you have just done will be loaded every time you open BforArtists and you won't have to keep doing it. Close the "Preferences" window and you are ready to go.

All blender releases.

https://download.blender.org/release/


Save and Edit

Now I have been told many times to do all your editing work in a .blender file and only Export as a .mu file when you believe you have got the model the way you want it. It is good practice to save often and when you have major changes to make new saves with increasing numbers at the end of it's title, that way if anything goes very wrong you can go back to a previous iteration to recover. Saving often is important, I personally have been over an hour into work many times, only to have the program shut down without any warning, so losing anything not saved.

If I understand correctly, Blender can hold much info about a vertice (the dots in editing mode that are points where edges join together to create faces.) but that the unity engine that KSP runs off can only read a limited amount per vertice. As such when the .mu plugin Exports it creates extra vertices at the identical points in virtual space, each extra vertice contains different bits of info so that the Unity engine can get the whole picture. Now there is a limit as to how many vertices Unity can render per mesh section, it is roughly 65,500 vertices. (I can never remember the exact amount) and as the export can multiply each vertice 5 to 6 times, it is good practice to limit the amount of vertices to 10,500 per section. This does not mean the entire model has to be less than this, just that it be cut into pieces with each being less than this. On export you will get a yellow warning dialogue pop up if a section exceeds the limit.

Heirarchy

When creating models for KSP it is always best to start with an empty axis as the top of your heirachy. Best practice is to have 2, 1 within the other and then your meshes within that second one, this allows for manipulating positions and sizes of the parts of your model and having them stay as you left them. When a save file is loaded it likes the top of a heirachy to be exactly oriented as it was when first created, having your meshes under the heirachy will mean they are loaded in the orientation you left them in. The second empty allows you to manipulate the entire model as 1 thing so that everything under it can be moved and resized as one piece.

To add an empty axis you need to, go to the lower header near the top of the work space and click on "Add", then roughly half way down hover over "Empty" then on it's drop down click on "Plain Axes". This will add a plain axis in to the heirachy on the right hand side of the workspace. Go over and double click to make it editable and then rename it to suit your project name. If you already have meshes you can simply hold down shift, left click and hold on them to drag them over the axis and then release the click to have them now inside your new axis heirachy. It is also best to have any animations you do be within a double empty as to buffer it from being changed on loading a save. Holding Alt after Shift before releasing the mouse over the part you want to reparent in will keep it in the same visual orientation. Just make sure you use the "Clear Inverse" option inside the "MuHeirarchy" button, on the top of the Heirarchy before exporting, otherwise you are likely to find things are not where you left them.

Apply Scale

Before you add your colliders and export as a .mu it is best to use the function provided by the plugin to "Apply Scale", this makes sure that no matter what size your pieces ended up as, they can be set to be considered 1 in all dimensions. The reason to do this before adding colliders is because if the colliders are already there when you do this they will be reset and you will have to redo them to get them back to how you had them.

Towards the top right are 4 boxes in blue, one says "Mu Heirachy" Click on it and then click on "Apply Scale", when you have a mesh piece highlighted, to set it to being considered 1 in all dimensions.

Importing things from other models.

It can save you a lot of time to take things from already existing models and drag them in to your own. You do this by having your model loaded and then importing another model in that has things you would like to add to your own. Everything from thrust transforms, docking transforms, ladder and airlock colliders, or even mesh pieces. Now with transforms and those colliders. it is important which way around they are because the game uses their orientation to determine which way to apply things. The blender enviroment has the Z axis and Y axis reversed compared to Unity, so several things are orientated along Y. Positive Y is the direction a Kerbal will face when leaving an airlock or climbing a ladder. Positive Y is also the side of a docking transform that will attract and join to another docking port. The docking transform (thrust transform too) tends to be loaded with no obvious direction, so you need to highlight it and then on the small menu on the right click on the symbol that looks like three lines joined in the centre in a triangular shape. This is called the "Object data properties" within it is a drop down marked as "Display As" It's default will be "Plain Axes", you will want to change it to "Arrows" so you can now see the axies.

Quite often when you drag things across (done by highlighting the thing then holding shift and left click holding it before dragging it in the heirachy menu till you are over the section you want it moved to. You then release the click to have it reparent itself where you released it.) they seem to keep the same orientation but after you export, if you were were to import your new export, you will find these dragged in things both not where you left them and often pointing in a different direction. To try to stop this from happening, once dragged in to your heirachy,

Towards the top right are 4 boxes in blue, one says "Mu Heirachy" Click on it and then click on "Clear Inverse", this should clear the orientation kept from it's old heirachy and set it to how it looks right now in your session. That way it will be where you expect, next import.

Seeing your texture in the editor

There is an issue with some of the KSP shaders that mean if you don't do a thing in the shader section, they will only show as all black in "Viewport Shading, Display in Material preview mode" which is one of the four ball choices up near the top right of the workspace. The one with the little red and white checker pattern. Usually when you click on this, any UV mapping you have done will show your texture pic applied to your model. But on KSP shaders that make use of the "Vertex Color" parameter you get the black unless you detatch the "Color" link. This is fine because unless you rename the title of your shader set up it won't be saved and will be linked next time you load it. (atleast on loading a previously exported .mu, haven't checked a .blend file yet.)

So with a part of your model that has been given a UV map and texture pic previously, highlight it and then bring up the shader workspace ( Tab on the top Header labeled "Shading") and you will see a number of of rounded end boxes with link cables connecting them.  Look for a red one named "Vertex Color" and click and hold on the yellowish link, then drag it away to detatch. Now when you have "Viewport Shading, Display in Material preview mode" selected, you should see your texture applied to your model, but only the parts that share the same material setup. If you have parts that use a different material you will have to unlink theirs as well if they also use a shader with the "Vertex Color" parameter.

 

Simple UV mapping.

 

Making your UV map first then creating a texture pic to match.

Use this example.

 

Getting the Warning: "Ngons in the mesh, Tangents will not be saved."

Ngons are faces that have not been divided up into sections. Unity likes all faces to be divided up into triangular sections, thankfully the .mu exporting program will automatically triangulate all faces on export so even though you will get this warning it will be fixed in the exported .mu file.

Face orientation.

The blender enviroment does not make it obvious which way around your faces are orientated unless you turn on "Face Orientation." There are 2 versions it provides but I prefer the one that shows blue on the side that will be seen in KSP and red on the side that will be see through. It will not show in wireframe mode but will in "Solid" and "Material View" modes. Here is where to find the toggle.
  Reveal hidden contents

Can also be useful for finding places where meshes have gaps in them.

Normals.

These relate directly to Face orientation. Here is the technical explanation.

"Normals in Blender represent lines that are created perpendicular to the geometry. The direction of the geometry determines the direction of the normal. Normals are used to determine the inward and outward sides of a face, edge, or vertex and can influence how geometry is rendered.

So a normal is created every time geometry is created and is used to determine which side of the geometry is the outward facing side. Let’s take a look at normals in more detail and find out why it is so important to understand normals."

Answer for people like me.

In relation to building models for KSP, Normals can be thought of as being the way of determining which way out the face that can't be seen through in KSP, is pointing. So when you use Face Orientation and see if what should be the outside of your mesh is correct = Blue, or incorrect = Red, you can flip the faces so they will be the other way around.

In editing, select the vertices of the face you want to flip. If you have got them all correctly then the face you are choosing will become a deeper shade of red or blue (assuming you have Face Orientation on). Remember if you are selecting many faces at once that if the vertices you have chosen are also all the vertices of a blue face, that it will get flipped to red. So try to pick groups of faces that don't highlight all the vertices of a blue face at the same time.

Then Click on The "Mesh" dropdown menu. Go down till you see "Normals", click on this and then go to the "Flip" option and click on it. All the red faces you have highlighted should now be blue. Repeat until you get all the incorrect faces.

Normals quite often get generated in reverse to what you expect, so it is good practice whenever you create new faces to check with Face Orientation to make sure they generated how you wanted.

Material Setup. Very important for exported .mu

Any model you create in the blender environment must have a Material set up applied before you  export as an .mu or else the meshes without them will be considered not to exist. Now I have just found out from @taniwha that there is an option on the import list pop up called "Force Invisible Meshes" , It can be found to the right of the list and is there to try to force meshes to show up that haven't been given a Material setup. Generally though meshes exported without a Material set up won't show up when imported. (Have  used the "Force" option successfully).

There are 2 ways to go about giving meshes a material set up, 1: you can import a model that already has the sort of KSP Shader setup you want and set your mesh to use it, then go down and edit the textures that it looks for to your own, as in this example.

2: You can create from scratch. As long as you followed the instructions when you first installed the plugin, then under the Material section, represented by a small pie chart symbol in the symbols menu on the right of the workspace. You will find that with that clicked (you must have a mesh highlighted first for it to be an option), that if you scroll down inside it's opened up menu you will reach a section (as this is from scratch nothing will show unless you clicked "New" at the top, it defaults to the name "Material" but you can click on and edit this to a name you want.) that is labeled "Mu Shader". Within this is a blue drop down named "Shaders", clicking on this will bring up a list of all the possible KSP shaders. When you choose one it will appear in a box 2 below called "Shader:" inbetween is a box called "Name:" You will want to put your choice of name in here or it won't save on export. Then below those 2 boxes is a drop down named "Textures". Depending on what you chose as your shader, there will be 1 or more name types e.g "_MainTex" "_BumpMap" "_Emissive" that when clicked on will show a box below it called  "Name:" with that name in it, just below that is a box that usually is defaulted to say "gray". You want to change it from gray to the the name of the texture pic you plan to use for that aspect. You will need to do this for each of the textures used by that shader. I usually pick a name and add a Capital B to the end for my Bump map and Capital E for my Emissive etc.

Once that is all done your mesh now has a Material setup. You can set other parts of your mesh to use the same Material as in the above example or you can give them a different Material setup depending on what they are for. A good example is for the new Lights in KSP. This is one where I use the Material setup from the stock lights for light up windows as the Material has an animation in it that I do not know how to do from scratch. That material set up and the unique name of the mesh you have using it are required in order to have the new light animation work in your model.
  Reveal hidden contents

 

.DDS vs .PNG used for your texture files.

KSP can actually work with a wide range of texture type files and even used to use an obscure one called .mbm

These days KSP has the easiest time when using .dds format. Only problem is that .dds are flipped vertically when compared to most other formats. Even though blender will flip it in Material View, it won't in the UV map workspace, so if you are working off a .dds, where you place your UV maps will not correspond in Material View as seen on your model. The answer to this is use a .png to start when you are mapping, once you have finished all your mapping and have your model textured as you want it. Open your .png in something like Paint.net and flip it vertically then save it as a .dds Make sure you flip it, not rotate it.

It is important that you save it as a"BC3 (Linear, DXT5)" type .dds for it to be used properly by KSP. The option shows up on the "Save Configuration" window when "Saving As" in Paint.net

 
Layers in KSP

There are 32 layers available. This is a hard limit in Unity. Layers 0 to 7 are reserved by Unity.

    0: Default (Unity built-in): All external visible parts that interact.
    1: TransparentFX (Unity built-in)
    2: Ignore Raycast (Unity built-in)
    3:
    4: Water (Unity built-in)
    5: UI (Unity built-in)
    6:
    7: (  @Ger_space said : found Layer 7: its the editor Gizmo handles in the SPH and VAB. )
    8: PartsList_Icons
    9: Atmosphere
    10: Scaled Scenery
    11: UIDialog
    12: UIVectors
    13: UI_Mask
    14: Screens
    15: Local Scenery
    16: kerbals/ Internals and their props. Everything in the heirachy must be set to layer 16, compared to external models the scene is rotated 180 degrees around the blender Z axis then 90 around the X axis.
    17: EVA
    18: SkySphere
    19: PhysicalObjects
    20: Internal Space: Used to prevent IVA camera views being blocked by props or hull parts also used when creating internal props)
    21: Part Triggers: Airlocks and Ladders etc, Must be tagged as to their function and have the boxes for trigger and separate ticked.
    22: KerbalInstructors
    23: AeroFXIgnore: Prevents parts from showing aero effects
    24: MapFX
    25: UIAdditional
    26: WheelCollidersIgnore: Layer for the wheel collision enhancer.
    27: WheelColliders: Used for the flat wheel collider, this tells the game where the wheel interaction is to be. It is the radius in the config that sets height of visible wheel to ground. If the radius is too large you will bounce high on spawn, too low , wheel will spin but not move.
    28: TerrainColliders
    29: DragRender
    30: SurfaceFX
    31: Vectors

The next about tags was found in a thread by @SpannerMonkey(smce)

 

TAGS

Ladder ( used for ladders )

Airlock ( used for hatches/doors )

Icon_Hidden ( used to hide item from editor view, engine shrouds use this )

Icon_Only    ( is useful if you want objects to only appear inside of the thumbnail, like decorative protective intake covers and remove-before-flight tags. Also handy for indicating different sized but similar looking parts ( thanks Ven ) )

NoAttach (prevents surface attach to the collision mesh in Editor. so you can have a part with areas that are not surface attachable while other areas are. set in same way as previous tags)

Drag_Hidden  (Prevents things like turbo fan blades being included or added to drag calculations)


Objects are visible in game when on layers 0 (Default), 15 (Local Scenery) and 19 (Disconnected Parts), and can also be visible on the camera plane on layers 12 (UI_Main) and 13 (UI_Mask). Only layer 0 displays mach and re-entry effects, so placing an object on layer 15 will disable these effects for that object.

 

Lights

Under the light section there is a MU properties section. Within are two wide boxes filled with smaller boxes. Nothing obvious about which box is which but if you hover over a box and look at the end of the fine print you can see a number, knowing about layers now I can see that starting at layer zero at the top left and going all the way across both large boxes, that the top layer is 0 to 15. The next layer down is 16 to 31. If the box is highlighted then that layer gets lit. If not then not.

The modern Stock lights have 0, 15, 17 and 23 highlighted. My old lights have everything highlighted which meant illuminating the entire planet from space. That explains that. You simply tap on a small box to change it's status.


Quaternions

This is a rotational method used by KSP. It used for animations and for orienting Props in Internal models for IVA.

When you start a fresh project in BforArtists/Blender it usually is defaulted to Euler in the Item Transform in the main workspace. (where you see info on location, rotation and scale). Before creating an animation you will want to be sure all your Heirachy parts/meshes are set to Quaterions or else the animation won't work in KSP.

As said it is also used for orientation for stock props. Trouble is it is not consistent and some props are set up differently. For things like Atmosphere depth and Speed readout it is "first is second and negative in BFA2(X), last is first (W)"

e.g

    PROP
    {
        name = ledPanelSpeed
        position = 0.0,0.07,-1.9813
        rotation = 0.707,0,0,0.707
        scale = 1,1,1
    }

In this example the first number 0.707 is in blender in the X rotation box and a negative number. The last number 0.707 is found in the W rotation box and the same positive.

Took a lot of experimenting to get that worked out. Unfortunately The Throttle and the Nav Ball are different.

Making lights requires you have the renderer set to Eevee. It affects what parameters are present on light objects and on Cycles the exported MU won't cast light.

Contributed by @tg626

Added information from the member @Kavaeric on page 8 of this thread. Here is the link to their out of forum pages.

https://kavaeric.notion.site/Notes-on-creating-engines-for-KSP-16f8338f483b473486ca9657674d85e2?pvs=4

 

thrustTransform

I have mentioned before that the standard Squad empty used to designate where and in what direction thrust comes from, alway turns 90 degrees on export. I had always thought this was some quirk of them being built in Unity, rather than Blender. As such I use my own and they are named differently. But recently I tried to use one I put in myself, renamed to match their name "thrustTransform" and upon export it turned 90 degrees. It had not occured to me that the name of the empty could affect how it is exported. I have to assume this is some quirk in the .mu plugin, though why it would happen is a mystery to me. So simply, don't name your thrust empty "thrustTransform" and remember to adjust your config so that it uses what ever name you did choose, and you will be right.

 

Depth mask

Rather lazily on my part, I had previously not bothered to look at the Depth Mask model that the Squad internals use to stop the entire internal from showing through, as such my internals could always be seen from all angles. I finally tried it and it makes for a much more realistic view from the outside. You simply take a section of the outside of your cab or cockpit that covers the areas you want blocked. Make sure it is set to layer 16, just like your internal and then import a Squad Depth Mask model. The Mk1 inline one for example. Then simply change the material property of your model to the "depthmask" material set up used by their mask. I do this because I can't see this material set up in the Shaders menu that comes with the .mu plugin. No need for any texture pics. This is because it just blocks the internal from being seen. Export to the folder you have your internal config in and add the model path to the config as a second MODEL. If unsure just look at a Squad cockpit internal config to see how they have done it. Load the game and if you remembered to adjust your Cockpit config to use your new internal config, you should get a good internal when you look out on the runway.

 

Animation

I just recently worked out how to animate colour and light sources myself, rather than rely of material properties or light sources from other models.
So here are the 3 types of animation I am aware how to do.

First: Physical animation, being able to make a mesh change location, change rotation or change scale. Go to the Animation work space.
First highlight the mesh in the heirachy that you wish to animate. Then go to the setting shown in the pic below to choose what type of animation you want to do, you will see that you can choose a single or combination of types.
Once chosen and showing in it's box you can insert your first Keyframe, using the small white key you can see in the pic. This usually defaults to frame 1. Though you can start at other frames it is best to start all animations at frame 1 and then if you don't wish them to do anything till another frame, move the frame positioner to the frame of your choice (Frame positioner is the green line in the pics and can be dragged by the mouse.) and then add a keyframe without changing anything. Then drag to the next frame you wish and use the tools in the workspace to change what you want, repeat till you have what you want and make sure you have put a keyframe at the end of your animation. You can actually animate several meshes at once, making sure to change and keyframe each one at each point you choose in the animation, this allows you to see how one mesh affects another as you go, especially as any mesh parented inside another will be changed by the parent as you change it. For my example I am just changing one scale dimension.



Second: Animate a meshes colour, generally used to make engine heat effects. the animation can be used by the "Throttle Animation Module" (Look in Squads Ion Engine to see an example.) Highlight a mesh you have made and give it a new Material Property, go down to the KSP shaders section of material properties and from the list choose "KSP/unlit". Go to the texture section and the "_MainTex" "Name:" to the name of the texture pic you are using. (Remember you are not changing "_MainTex" to something else but rather the reference name found in the box under where it says "Name:" (Usually it is defaulted to say "White" or "Grey")(best to choose a white or very light colour texture on your pic for the mesh) Then go down slightly further and open the drop down that says "Colors" and open it up. It should be defaulted to have a black rectangle box under the "Name:" section. Left click on the black box and you will see a pop up with a circle, choices and a slider.


As this example is for a heat effect, leave this as is and then right click the same box and a small menu will come up. At the top of the menu it has the option of "Insert keyframe" . Left click it and then open the Animate workspace. If you have left the frames at frame one from the last exercise then you will see the dots that show you have inserted a keyframe at frame one, if not then remove the keyframe and reset to frame one before redoing. Then move to the frame you want to end on and go left click on the color box to open the popup. Drag the slider on the right all the way up and you will see the circle is a colour palette. Drag the selection dot around till you get the colour you want, then go back out, right click on the color box and choose add keyframe. ( obviously for an effect where it goes through multiple colours you could add more keyframes to your animation, changing the colour each time.) And there you have your animated colour.


You can add lights from the Add menu, remember to reparent them into your heirachy. (note the 4 blue boxes in the "Culling Mask" section. These are the ones needed to cause models and ground to be affected by a light source without lighting things you don't want lit.)


Adding an effect where the light source goes from dark to light is very similar to changing the colour but now we are using the Light properties. Same idea, in the box that has a number and a W for Watts, change the number to zero, then right click and then click "Add Keyframe", go to the Animate workspace and move to your end frame, go change the number to Watt value that you want the light to brighten to, then insert a keyframe as before. Remember you can set the colour of your light using the box above the number. This could also be used in conjunction with the colour animation to make lights that you want to come on gradually.
 

Now to finish any animation you need to name it. This is the name the animation module will reference in your config file. In the Animation workspace to the left just above the frames section are 4 small boxes, we have been working with the far left to add frames, now we use the far right to name them.(Looks like little rectangles stacked) Open up the dropdown you see linked to your mesh, material or light name, double left click on the "NLA Tracks" you see and type the name you want, hit enter. You have named that particular animation. Repeat for each. So far it seems that if you name the physical animation the same as the others it doesn't export correctly, so best to name it differently.
  

So far I know of no way to see the light and colour animations on the mesh in blender, but if you look at the properties set to the first frame, then look at them set to the last frame, then you should see the change if it has worked.
